feat: first draft of working with api and data sources (#4066)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/data-analysis/data-analysis-connect-to-db.md

Utilizing the [DataFrame library](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/gettingstarted.html), Kotlin Notebook can establish 
connections to databases, execute SQL queries, and import the results for further operations.

For detailed example, see the [Notebook in the KotlinDataFrame SQL Examples GitHub repository](https://github.com/zaleslaw/KotlinDataFrame-SQL-Examples/blob/master/notebooks/imdb.ipynb).

## Before you start

1. Download and install the latest version of [IntelliJ IDEA Ultimate](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/?section=mac).
2. Install the [Kotlin Notebook plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/16340-kotlin-notebook) in IntelliJ IDEA.

   > Alternatively, access the Kotlin Notebook plugin from **Settings/Preferences** | **Plugins** | **Marketplace** within IntelliJ IDEA.
   >
   {type="tip"}

3. Create a new Kotlin Notebook by selecting **File** | **New** | **Kotlin Notebook**.
4. In the Kotlin Notebook, import the Kotlin DataFrame library by running the following command:

```kotlin
%use dataframe
```

5. Ensure you have access to an SQL database, either locally hosted, such as MariaDB or MySQL, or remotely hosted on a 

> server or cloud platform.

Reviewer: please remove about remotely hosted or cloud platform (we could have some issues here, need to test)

Author: will remove - thank you!

val dbConfig = DatabaseConfiguration(URL, USER_NAME, PASSWORD)
```

3. **Retrieve table schemas:** Once connected, use the `getSchemaForAllSqlTables()` function to fetch and display the 
schema information for each table in the database:

```kotlin
val dataschemas = DataFrame.getSchemaForAllSqlTables(dbConfig)

dataschemas.forEach { 
    println("---Yet another table schema---")
    println(it)
    println()
}
```

For more information on connecting to SQL databases, see [Read from SQL databases in the DataFrame documentation](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/readsqldatabases.html).

## Retrieve and manipulate data

After [establishing a connection to an SQL database](#connect-to-database), you can retrieve and manipulate data in Kotlin Notebook, utilizing the DataFrame library. 
You can use `readAllSqlTables` to retrieve data and methods, such as [`.filter`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/filter.html), [`.groupBy`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/groupby.html), 
and [`.convert`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/convert.html) to manipulate data. 

Let's look at an example of connecting to an IMDB database and retrieving data about movies directed by Quentin Tarantino:

> 1. **Fetch data from all tables:** Retrieve data from all tables using the `readAllSqlTables` function:

Reviewer: Sorry, could you please concentrate more on the function for reading data from one sql table instead of reading all (it's experimental functuionality and could change in next release)

Author: Sure, I'll change it to an example with `readSqlTable` 👍

grouping, sorting, and aggregating data, helping you to uncover and understand patterns within your data.

Let's dive into an example that involves analyzing actor data from a movie database, focusing on the most frequently 
occurring first names of actors:

1. **Retrieve data from a specific table:**
Extract data from the "actors" table using the [`readSqlTable`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/readsqldatabases.html#reading-specific-tables) function:

```kotlin
val actorDf = DataFrame.readSqlTable(dbConfig, "actors", 10000)
```

2. **Manipulate data:**
Process the retrieved data to identify the top 20 most common actor first names. This analysis involves several DataFrame methods:

```kotlin
val top20ActorNames = actorDf
   .groupBy { first_name } // Group the data by the first_name column to organize it based on actor first names.
   .count() // Count the occurrences of each unique first name, providing a frequency distribution.
   .sortByDesc("count") // Sort the results in descending order of count to identify the most common names.
   .take(20) // Select the top 20 most frequent names for analysis.
top20ActorNames
```

> ## What's next

Reviewer: What's here? :)

[//]: # (title: Connect and retrieve data from databases)

Kotlin Notebook offers capabilities for connecting to and retrieving data from various types of SQL databases, such as 
MariaDB, PostgreSQL, MySQL, and SQLite. 

> Utilizing the [DataFrame library](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/gettingstarted.html), Kotlin Notebook can establish 

Author: that's a very nice point thank you - I'll update it for consistency!

2. Install the [Kotlin Notebook plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/16340-kotlin-notebook) in IntelliJ IDEA.

   > Alternatively, access the Kotlin Notebook plugin from **Settings/Preferences** | **Plugins** | **Marketplace** within IntelliJ IDEA.
   >
   {type="tip"}

3. Create a new Kotlin Notebook by selecting **File** | **New** | **Kotlin Notebook**.
4. In the Kotlin Notebook, import the Kotlin DataFrame library by running the following command:

```kotlin
%use dataframe
```

5. Ensure you have access to an SQL database, such as MariaDB or MySQL.

## Connect to database

You can connect to and interact with an SQL database using specific functions from the [DataFrame library](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/gettingstarted.html). 
You can use `DatabaseConfiguration` to establish a connection to your database and `getSchemaForAllSqlTables` to retrieve 
the schema of all tables within it.

Let's look at an example:

1. **Import libraries:** Import the DataFrame library, which is essential for data manipulation tasks, along with
the necessary Java libraries for SQL connectivity and utility functions: 

```kotlin

> %use dataframe

Author: I see what you mean, but for this specific case I think it might be better to repeat this key information (importing DataFrame) helps with creating an end2end step list - people might arrive at the page searching at this topic missing the Before you start (and if they completed another guide before but they are opening a new notebook which is realistic they might altogether miss that step). It doesn't hurt if they repeat this single step so I think it should be fine.

import java.sql.DriverManager
import java.util.*
```

2. **Establish database connection:** Use `DatabaseConfiguration` to define your database's connection parameters, 
including the URL, username, and password:

```kotlin
val URL = "YOUR_URL"
val USER_NAME = "YOUR_USERNAME"
val PASSWORD = "YOUR_PASSWORD"

val dbConfig = DatabaseConfiguration(URL, USER_NAME, PASSWORD)
```

3. **Retrieve table schemas:** Once connected, use the `getSchemaForAllSqlTables()` function to fetch and display the 
schema information for each table in the database:

```kotlin
val dataschemas = DataFrame.getSchemaForAllSqlTables(dbConfig)

dataschemas.forEach { 
    println("---Yet another table schema---")
    println(it)
    println()
}
```

> For more information on connecting to SQL databases, see [Read from SQL databases in the DataFrame documentation](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/readsqldatabases.html).

Author: good idea - done! 👍

## Retrieve and manipulate data

After [establishing a connection to an SQL database](#connect-to-database), you can retrieve and manipulate data in Kotlin Notebook, utilizing the DataFrame library. 
You can use `readSqlTable` to retrieve data. To manipulate data, you can use methods, such as [`.filter`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/filter.html), [`.groupBy`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/groupby.html), 
and [`.convert`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/convert.html). 

Let's look at an example of connecting to an IMDB database and retrieving data about movies directed by Quentin Tarantino:

1. **Fetch data from a table:** Use the `readSqlTable` function to retrieve data from the "movies" table, setting `limit` 
to restrict the query to the first 100 records for efficiency:

```kotlin
val dfs = DataFrame.readSqlTable(dbConfig, tableName = "movies", limit = 100)
```

2. **Execute SQL query:**
Use an SQL query to retrieve a specific dataset related to movies directed by Quentin Tarantino. 
This query selects movie details and combines genres for each movie:

> ```kotlin

Reviewer 2: Adding code comments explaining the parts of the query would be helpful.

Author: Sure thing - I'm adding a comment!  👍 I intend to keep it as concise as possible as it's purely SQL and not DataFrame.

val props = Properties()
props.setProperty("user", USER_NAME)
props.setProperty("password", PASSWORD)

val TARANTINO_FILMS_SQL_QUERY = """
    SELECT name, year, rank, GROUP_CONCAT(genre) as "genres"
    FROM movies JOIN movies_directors ON movie_id = movies.id
    JOIN directors ON directors.id=director_id LEFT JOIN movies_genres ON movies.id = movies_genres.movie_id
    WHERE directors.first_name = "Quentin" AND directors.last_name = "Tarantino"
    GROUP BY name, year, rank
    ORDER BY year
    """

var dfTarantinoMovies: DataFrame<*>

DriverManager.getConnection(URL, props).use { connection ->
   connection.createStatement().use { st ->
      st.executeQuery(TARANTINO_FILMS_SQL_QUERY).use { rs ->
         val dfTarantinoFilmsSchema = DataFrame.getSchemaForResultSet(rs, connection)
         dfTarantinoFilmsSchema.print()

         dfTarantinoMovies = DataFrame.readResultSet(rs, connection)
         dfTarantinoMovies
      }
   }
}
```

3. **Manipulate and filter data:**

> After fetching the Tarantino movies dataset, you can further manipulate and filter the data.

Reviewer 2: What is the manipulation or filter applied here? Maybe code comments can help.

Author: added some code comments 👍  - I was debating this one as it is written in the resulting output, but adding it might help.

```kotlin
val df = dfTarantinoMovies
    .fillNA { year }.with { 0 }
    .convert { year }.toInt()
    .filter { year > 2000 }
```

> The resulting output is a DataFrame where missing values in the year column are replaced with 0 using the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The resulting output is a data frame where missing values in the year column are replaced with 0 using the 
```

Reviewer 2: Here we are referring to a data frame as a simple noun, different from DataFrame, the name of the library. I see this issue across the tutorials, please change it.

Author: as discussed - I'll keep it as DataFrame as that's the name of the instance to avoid confusion

[`.fillNA`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/fill.html#fillna) method, the year column is converted to integer values 
with the [`.convert`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/convert.html) method, and the data is filtered to include only 
rows from the year 2000 onwards using the [`.filter`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/filter.html) method.

> ## Analyze data in Kotlin Notebook

Reviewer 2: The 2 steps of this section are already covered in the previous section. What about A) removing "Step 3 Manipulate and filter data" from the "Retrieve section" and placing it inside "Analyze data". You continue the end-to-end data process with the same data set.

   > Alternatively, access the Kotlin Notebook plugin from **Settings/Preferences** | **Plugins** | **Marketplace** within IntelliJ IDEA.
   >
   {type="tip"}

3. Create a new Kotlin Notebook by selecting **File** | **New** | **Kotlin Notebook**.
4. In the Kotlin Notebook, import the Kotlin DataFrame library by running the following command:

```kotlin
%use dataframe
```

5. Ensure you have access to an SQL database, such as MariaDB or MySQL.

## Connect to database

You can connect to and interact with an SQL database using specific functions from the [Kotlin DataFrame library](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/gettingstarted.html). 
You can use `DatabaseConfiguration` to establish a connection to your database and `getSchemaForAllSqlTables()` to retrieve 
the schema of all tables within it.

Let's look at an example:

1. Open your Kotlin Notebook file (`.ipynb`).

2. Import the Kotlin DataFrame library, which is essential for data manipulation tasks, along with
the necessary Java libraries for SQL connectivity and utility functions: 

```kotlin
%use dataframe
import java.sql.DriverManager
import java.util.*
```

> 3. Use `DatabaseConfiguration` to define your database's connection parameters, 

Author: it's a nice idea to specify, thank you for the suggestion 

- I think I would prefer to refer to it as a class instead. The docs indeed refer to it as a parameter one time, but in a separate context

         val dfTarantinoFilmsSchema = DataFrame.getSchemaForResultSet(rs, connection)
         dfTarantinoFilmsSchema.print()

         dfTarantinoMovies = DataFrame.readResultSet(rs, connection)
         dfTarantinoMovies
      }
   }
}
```

3. After fetching the Tarantino movies dataset, you can further manipulate and filter the data.

```kotlin
val df = dfTarantinoMovies
    .fillNA { year }.with { 0 } // Replace any missing values in the 'year' column with 0.
    .convert { year }.toInt() // Convert the 'year' column to integers.
    .filter { year > 2000 } // Filter the data to include only movies released after the year 2000.
df
```

The resulting output is a DataFrame where missing values in the year column are replaced with 0 using the 
[`.fillNA`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/fill.html#fillna) method, the year column is converted to integer values 
with the [`.convert`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/convert.html) method, and the data is filtered to include only 
rows from the year 2000 onwards using the [`.filter`](https://kotlin.github.io/dataframe/filter.html) method.

## Analyze data in Kotlin Notebook

> After [establishing a connection to an SQL database](#connect-to-database), Kotlin Notebook enables in-depth data analysis 

Author: I like this suggestion! 👍 - I updated it but removed "an" from it to put more focus on the analysis instead of in-depth.
